I've got to say I'm just stunned
there are this many people here
because I saw the original schedule
maybe a month ago and I said,
"Oh look,
I'm after lunch on Friday and I'm
up against the Aqua Feedback Forum.
It's just going to be me and a
couple of close friends." So this,
I'm stunned by this.
So I'm going to be talking about
large-scale WebObjects applications
and because the content of this
is a little more subjective than
some of the earlier sessions,
I thought it's appropriate for
me to let you know who I am.
So Steve Meyer, consulting engagement
manager from Apple iServices.
I've actually done WebObjects and
Next Apple related technologies here for
just about two weeks short of ten years.
The first six years of that I was doing
what you'd now call co-contracting.
development.
Two of those as a consultant,
another four doing shrink wrap.
And in the last four years,
I've been with Apple doing
the WebObjects development.
And just recently, I've been working as
the consulting manager.
And what that means,
outside of the business aspect of
writing proposals and things like that,
is I'm responsible for
doing architectural reviews,
design reviews at the
beginning of projects,
midway through projects.
Sometimes when customers
have done projects,
and they say, "Okay,
can we have someone from Apple come
in and just make sure we're on the
right track before we go too far?"
So I think I actually have a fairly
good picture of what everybody has as
a background for what they want to do.
Introduction.
Why is it important that you're here?
The thing is that even though we work
in a business where we tend to think of,
"Okay, everybody's on the web now,"
it's not even close to true.
As a matter of fact,
the big money isn't there yet.
I mean,
the government is just starting this.
State and local governments
just starting this.
Your conservative businesses, you know,
Caterpillar, General Motors.
You know, you look at the Dow,
and they're the ones who actually
have a lot of money and they're
used to spending a lot of money.
And I can tell you from the perspective
of somebody who has done the,
you know,
small startup thing that consulting
to those kind of people is a great
way to pay the mortgage while
you're writing the next killer app.
The second thing here is that large-scale
projects really are different.
You can't just say, "Oh,
it's twice as hard,
twice as many people."
The standard problem there
has to do with communication.
But there's another thing that
Ernie kind of barely touched on,
which many people don't realize
unless they stick around for a while.
And I like to use the analogy of
A hill.
And if you could go with the picture
that everybody kind of uses when they
want to indicate steep learning curve,
though I want to use this in a
completely different context.
You've got this, starts out gentle,
gets steeper and steeper and steeper.
And if you think of that in terms
of the complexity of a problem,
what you find is that as everything
in the tool space improves,
you're cutting little
steps into that hill.
And what that means is
year by year by year,
you're making hard problems simple.
You know, that top step keeps rising.
But there's always a top step.
It means that at some
point you reach the top,
and what you don't realize is
that while we're making the
harder and harder things easier,
we're making the first hard thing harder.
We're losing the middle ground.
So what you end up with is a case where
as soon as you get past the easy stuff,
you're suddenly in the complex
and you need all of the,
what people say, baggage, but it's not,
of large projects.
So, what you're going to learn here,
mostly, if I do my job,
is how does WebObjects
fit in a large project?
What do you want to do
special with WebObjects when
you're in a large project?
And of course,
what I think is most important,
what comes out of my
experience of reviewing things,
is what not to do.
How to stay out of trouble.
So, that is a large project.
If you have any of these things,
you've got a large project.
Now, that's kind of misleading because
most of those things are related.
I mean, no one is going to have a large
project team working for a long time
producing not much for a few people.
So it all does kind of pile together.
The one thing that's not on this list,
and which kind of ties
the whole thing together,
big money.
When I say a large-scale project,
it's not less than a million dollars.
Okay, just use that as a number.
It's my own number, but... So,
I want to start out with just the
general engineering practices.
If there's anybody here
who's run a large project,
is a project manager,
doesn't matter if you've
ever used WebObjects at all,
the next 10 minutes or so is going to
be either boring or comforting to you.
And for all those people who have
never been on part of a large project,
this will tell you what it is that
is going to be expected of you.
So, you always need these practices.
And for the most part,
WebObjects doesn't impose anything on it.
So, first obviously, project management.
And I'm going to try to go
through these relatively quickly.
Staffing.
We're not just talking about
the development staffing here.
database admins or network people.
We're talking about
configuration management,
talking about technical documentation,
all that stuff.
What we as developers
typically call overhead.
Which
That's wrong.
Communication.
It's another nice way of hiding
a dirty word to developers.
That means meetings.
And I think it means real meetings
in the sense of actually talking
to each other face-to-face.
Video conferencing can work.
Audio conferencing doesn't work.
Email, you're just wishing if you
think that's going to get done.
Scheduling.
Not much to say there except that
when you have a large project,
you look out and you see you don't
really have to deliver for nine months.
And it's very easy to just kind of
cruise through the first six of those.
So scheduling really should
be--you need to test things
basically a week at a time.
If your granularity is
any coarser than that,
you're not really scheduling.
And the last thing that you
can't possibly track it.
Okay, source code control.
This is kind of a religion with
anybody who's been on a large project.
You're not serious if you're
not controlling your source.
And also, it's not just source,
although this says that every single
document associated with a project,
put it under the version control.
If nothing else,
you know you've got it all in a
repository and somebody's responsible
for backing up the repository.
You can never lose more than since
the last time you checked in.
In this case,
I actually have a recommendation.
I really like CVS.
It's the most common thing
for our developers to use.
It's used internally by Apple.
And the biggest advantage
for a large project is this:
the optimistic locking.
It means that you're not
getting in each other's way.
Let's see.
Show of hands here.
Who knows what optimistic locking is?
Okay, that's only 25%. So I'm going
to go through and explain that.
The idea is that when you have
a source code control system,
a pessimistic system basically says that
you can check out a document for viewing,
but you can't modify it until you say,
you know, I want to lock this thing.
And as soon as you've done that,
no one else can lock it.
They've got it.
And this presentation is actually a good
example of what the problem with that is,
is that there's like 45 slides in this.
And I turned in the first
draft about a week ago.
And then I flew back home to Virginia,
and I made a bunch of text changes to it.
At the same time,
we had a graphics professional changing
about four of the graphics here.
We came back, and since we didn't
have any communication,
we both changed the thing.
control.
Let's suppose we put it
under a pessimistic system.
What would happen is he would
have noticed that I was away.
He would have checked it out.
I would have been somewhere else not
being able to communicate with him.
I would have broken the lock anyway.
And I'd be off and running.
So in a large -- go on.
That's what's going to happen when you
have a whole bunch of people who can't
necessarily communicate all the time.
You just end up breaking
pessimistic locks all the time.
The optimistic locking scheme is that
everybody's allowed to check it out.
It's on checking in that everybody
has to sync up to make sure that
they have the latest version.
Now, great example.
It turns out that between
myself and the graphics guy,
we'd only both touched one slide.
So I could have put my stuff in
with just one conflict and then we
could have negotiated over that.
So that's why I'm a big fan.
Bug
You know,
all the software is going to have bugs.
You can't track it.
You can't fix it.
Simple enough.
I don't have a specific
recommendation here.
We use a lot of different things,
including some homegrown things.
Where it says web access here,
what I really mean is remote access.
Because, again,
if you've got a large team,
sooner or later,
somebody is going to need to
be able to access that thing
when they're on vacation,
something like that.
The other elements here
mostly just have to do with,
they're what's good in supporting
release management and some other
things that will be coming up real soon.
[Transcript missing]
Okay,
that's pretty much it for general stuff.
Now let's talk about what it is that
you need to support WebObjects itself.
First, documentation.
Now the project people are going to go,
well, documentation is something you
need for everything anyway.
And the real reason I put it under the
WebObjects thing is that WebObjects
does have what I would call some
special needs for documentation.
Only some of these, though.
Like requirements.
Requirements are pretty much the same
everywhere in that from your customers,
what you're likely to
get is relatively vague,
high-level descriptions of functionality.
Specifications is something else.
Specifications,
what we want for specifications is
we want to have actual prototype
interfaces of all the screens,
and we want a navigation map,
and we want functional descriptions of
what's supposed to occur between those.
Now, the customers aren't necessarily
going to give you that.
And I'll get back to that in just a bit.
That's what we call a spec.
It's not enough to just kind of say, oh,
would we like to be an e-commerce system.
The design documentation actually
is kind of interesting because as
we usually do design documentation,
a lot of it looks like
the specifications.
One nice thing you can do is, you know,
for each of the design
mockups you've got,
go ahead and associate with that the,
you know, a screenshot of WoeBuilder for
what that component looks like.
And then you also,
you want to have documentation on
a component by component basis.
You know, a one sheet on each component
basically says here's what it is,
inputs, outputs, actions, etc.
The deployment documentation is
for the most part fairly simple.
It's, you know,
a lot of it is just a simple document.
If you had to install the
software from scratch,
including really, you know, assume,
install the web server, install the apps,
install the database, etc.
And if the thing crashes,
how do you restart it?
That's pretty much what it comes down to.
Documents like this,
it's really good to have pictures.
And I'll be showing you a
picture in a little bit,
you know,
the kind of picture I'm talking about.
The other two things,
the coding and the user,
for the most part,
those are pretty standard documentation.
They're only included
here for completeness.
So, the hardware architecture you
should expect to be working to.
You start out, this is a large project,
therefore, eventually you're going to
have multiple web servers,
multiple app servers,
multiple data sources.
Now,
that's not the same thing as necessarily
saying multiple databases or a single
database replicated or whatever.
That's more detail than I'm
talking about right now.
But, that's what we're looking at.
And I simplified the
picture a little bit.
You notice that only web server
one is connected to anything,
and only really app server one
is connected further downstream.
Otherwise,
lots of lines all over everywhere.
Up in front there, the DNS,
that's referring to a DNS round robin
that basically masks the fact to the net
that you've got multiple web servers.
So,
they both appear to be the same thing.
This is the kind of thing, like I said,
you're going to expect to see
something like this in your system
admin/deployment documentation so that
someone knows how to hook something up.
Now I'm actually going to zip by an
animation that wasn't supposed to be
in here and move on to the software
architecture that that hardware
architecture locks you into already.
And that's actually partly a bad
thing and partly a good thing.
First thing, you know that because you
have different hardware,
separate hardware, multiple instances,
all that, you start out designing for the
problems you're going to have with
data caching and synchronization.
And I'm guessing that many of
you were here yesterday when
Dan did his presentation on that.
So you should know the
issues to look out for.
Also given that, once again,
if you've separated,
you know you've got multiple instances,
you know you've got data
synchronization issues,
go ahead and break out the application
into more than one application.
I mean, don't dump all the functionality
into one big thing.
And typically that's done by, you know,
you pick the things that are
read-only because you can deal
with their synchronization issues.
Because you can deal with
their synchronization one way.
You pick the things that are, you know,
public, can see,
that only maybe employees can see,
and that only people who are just,
you know,
administering the database can see.
And when you do that,
you also get the benefit that
you can then separately optimize
configurations for each of those.
One thing that's really quite
helpful for that is if you've
got any particular function,
you know,
usually this is an admin function,
where you're expecting it's
going to take a long time,
it's going to put a
big load on something.
You can schedule it so that that app
only runs during low-level times.
So you'll never be, you know,
hitting your system at the
same time your users are.
Okay, so you've got an architecture.
Let's talk about some issues
in application design.
I'm not going to teach you how to design
an application so much as show you what
parts of application design are likely
to cause you problems in a big app.
Okay, first, typical code organization
looks like this.
I mean, and you have a data framework
or more than one framework.
You've got multiple
sources of different types.
And it's good to get that off by itself.
That'll have your EO model.
That'll have your custom classes.
You have this fixes framework,
which always accumulates.
And I'll talk about that in a little bit,
but it happens.
And then you'll have your
architectural frameworks,
your reusable components
for the most part.
Then you'll have one
or more applications.
As a result, your team looks like that.
You have an architecture team,
you got a data modeling team,
you got a couple app teams.
Now it seems like every time I look
at how someone has set up a team,
they've piled all the experience people
on to the data modeling and architecture.
And there's a real problem with that.
Well, there's two real problems,
actually.
One has to do... One of them has
to do with the fact that you're...
Always going to be running the risk
of having your data modeling and
architecture being so sophisticated
that your app teams can't use it.
The other problem with this is that,
and this has got to kind
of come up several times,
you've got a maintainability problem
there because at any particular
point it's your senior people
who are most likely to leave.
So I always like to
make sure that even if,
and we're going with team here,
and again, teams aren't necessarily
very many people.
When I talked about a large
project way at the beginning,
what is a large team?
A large team is maybe 15 or 20 people,
but the WebObjects part of that,
we're talking 3, 4, 5.
I mean, that's it.
If you have an app that takes
15 or 20 WebObjects developers,
I only know one of those
in my personal experience.
And that was an effort that was
going to replace a system that the
federal government currently spends
$300 million a year to maintain.
So if you got one of those, call me.
Anyway, the other thing about this is
you have to make sure that you
have planned communication.
And I'll get into this pretty
shortly about what it is,
why the communication is necessary,
but the part that it's
planned is what's important.
Suppose you've got an architecture team.
They're building reusable components.
If you have that once a month,
you have to make the architecture team
stand up and do a PowerPoint presentation
on what they've done in the
last month so the rest of the
teams know what's available.
You can't count on them to just,
you know, send out messages, "Ooh,
we've got this new, cool,
reusable component.
Come look at it."
It doesn't work that way.
So plan the communication.
Plan the meetings.
Okay, data modeling.
We're on the data modeling team.
What do the data modeling
teams need to watch out for?
You've got to make sure that
you're modeling the process,
not just the static data where you
can look at what the company does.
You need to be sure how are the
applications going to use this data.
And the biggest thing that
happens when you don't do that,
The next thing:
you over-normalize the data.
What that means is that you can never
ever actually get to a meaningful
collection of data to display to a
user without having to follow a bunch
of relationships or a few database
folks do a bunch of table joins.
I've got to say, like,
80% of everything I see that I look
at and I don't like the data modeling,
that's it.
And the nice thing about it is that
there's some relatively simple fixes,
and you tend to get big
performance wins when you do it,
and people are impressed.
The bad thing is that it shouldn't
happen in the first place.
And this last one, being cautious with
the entity inheritance.
I don't know why it is
that it comes out this way,
but every time I run into a project where
someone has used entity inheritance,
there's a problem on the project.
There's different problems.
But it just seems to be
one of those things where,
you know, if you see that someone's
using entity inheritance,
ask them why.
And make sure everyone
knows it's happening.
Abstraction of data
interfaces is a great thing.
It's an OO concept from way back.
But, as you can see,
I have a couple things
that I don't like about it.
Really the biggest one
here is the first one.
That if you try to abstract too much
away about what your data sources are,
you end up losing any of the advantages
that the people who designed the
data sources built into them.
A great example is if you can
put an interface on top of EOF,
and if you forget to put prefetching
of relationships into it,
you've blown any chance of
optimizing your data access.
Second thing is kind of similar.
If you're trying to abstract
things that just don't go together,
you're going to end up with something
that doesn't really work for you.
That's actually a general
case of the first one.
And the last is,
whenever you get into the mode of,
I'm going to take something and build
a system that will work with anything,
you always base it on what you know.
And when you come up with something that
doesn't match what you abstracted to,
there's a really good chance instead
of changing your abstraction,
you're just going to hack in some code to
make it work with just that one source.
And then you've defeated the entire
purpose of doing the abstraction.
Another thing that's great:
Design for reuse.
Although, see that never really happens
in the real world either.
What you have is design for use,
redesign for reuse.
Or, design for use,
recognize you can reuse.
So,
You tend to want to kind of make a
second sweep through the whole app
once you've got it done and figure out
which bits you want to use next time.
But for a lot of people who have
done even small apps before,
they have with them
kind of the collection.
These are things that
have been useful before.
So there actually are, you know,
it's not like you're always starting
from scratch with reusable components.
And the best thing for, you know,
when it comes to reuse with WebObjects
is the small reusable components,
small elements.
And if you want to know a
good way to design them,
go look at what WoExtensions
has as a framework.
The other thing that, you know,
clearly from a reuse standpoint
is your data framework,
your enterprise objects.
Basically,
if you model the thing properly,
you can carry it around,
although you may need to modify it for
the individual needs of applications,
and I'll talk about that too.
And lastly, when you do this,
organize them into things that don't
have dependencies on one another.
It's a real shame when you
find that there's a really
cool table implementation,
but it requires that you link in
a framework that has somebody's
own idea of what a set should be.
I've found that a lot of times.
Not only frustrating for the
people who are trying to use it,
but there's almost a guarantee that at
some point someone's going to forget
to drag along that utilities framework
and it's just not going to work.
I get asked about this a lot
from a design standpoint.
People want to go things be fast.
They hear, "Ooh, multi-threading.
Let's do it." And, you know,
multi-threading is hard.
It's really hard.
There's a few cases where
you really want to use it.
And it's mostly in terms of somebody,
something that's listening and gets
a request and spits the request
off to somebody else to process
and then starts listening again.
You can think of, you know,
the WoW adapter is doing that.
But you don't really want to think
of your application as doing that.
It's actually doing processing.
And, like I said,
it's really hard to write.
It's really hard to debug.
You notice I didn't even put
test in the middle there.
Because the assumption is you're
going to have to debug it.
You're not going to get it right.
And the cool thing about this is that
multi-threaded things fail under load.
And they come under load
when you load test them.
And that's at the end of
your development cycle.
So you're pretty much--you know,
when you go down this road,
you're pretty much guaranteed to
get a hard to track down bug just
as you want to go to production.
Even if it's a simple solution,
that's quite a lot of stress.
The benefits of multithreading.
Tough to really be sure as
you're designing you're going
to get a chance to use them.
Because unless you have the
source to everything down the
line that you're dealing with,
you can't be sure that somebody
isn't defeating the whole purpose.
Whether it's occurring somewhere
in the enterprise object framework,
in the adapter for a
particular kind of database,
in the client libraries
for that database,
in the connections to the server.
There's just too many places where you
can spend a lot of time and find out that
someone's just serializing it anyway.
However you have to do it,
WebObjects does support it.
I mean, by default,
resources are requested and dealt with,
you know, images, that sort of thing,
in multiple threads.
And you can turn on the request
handling and have a ball,
but...
I warned you.
That's all I'm willing to say there.
I have an analogy here that
I like to use when someone says,
"I'd like to go to multithreading
for performance." And that is that,
think of the grocery store.
You've got a couple of checkout lines,
a bunch of people piling up behind it.
And what do they do when that happens?
They open up another checkout stand,
and people go move over to that,
and you're good.
To us,
that's starting up another instance.
Now, if they manage to actually fill
up the whole store all the time,
they open another store
a mile down the road.
For that, we're talking about bringing
up another app server.
What you never,
ever have anybody do is go to
the checkout clerks and say,
why don't you process some
of the customers in parallel?
That's really kind of the end
of my feeling on multithreading.
Now, when you're designing things,
there are some warning signs.
And this is actually--warning
is a strong word,
but I couldn't come up with
one that I really wanted.
This is when I go out
and I review something,
I see one of these things happening.
I have three questions.
Do you need to be doing this to
get the functionality you want?
Is there any other way to do this?
And right now,
do you have it documented to the
point where I could have walked in,
not talked to you,
and found out the answers to
the questions I just asked you?
And if the answer is
yes to all these things,
it's fine.
I'm pretty happy.
But if the answer is no
to any of these things,
then there's work to be done.
First of them kind of go together.
You're subclassing a
lot of Apple classes.
You're kind of intertwined
with Apple's classes.
This is...when you go to training,
this is what they show you.
This is the ideal.
You've got bottom four
things are all ours,
top thing's yours.
And of course that top thing
may be multiple frameworks,
but it's all up there.
You're not...
Really getting in the way
of the WebObjects or the
Eurocontrol or any of that,
that's what I see a lot.
Just, vroom, vroom, vroom.
Now, I gotta say that this is
the kind of thing that the
Objective-C developers are much more
likely to be able to get away with.
So the thing is,
Objective-C gives you a much bigger
gun to shoot yourself in the foot with.
That's not saying I don't like it.
As a language, I like it.
But this kind of structure is
something that's really common when
you've found something that's kind
of accumulated bits of Objective-C.
And another problem here is
those little thin blue lines,
chances are they've got
dependencies between them,
and that violates one of those
rules for usability I pointed out.
That you can't, even if you decide you
really like that one,
you know, second blue line there,
it's got some functionality you need,
you may have to carry
along the rest of it.
And that's bad.
More warning signs.
You've got large application
in session classes.
Now this is partly a design
issue and partly a coding issue.
Every once in a while you'll want to
sweep through the application in session
classes and see what cruft they've
accumulated as people just put things in.
Because it's a big global
variable basically.
You can stuff anything you want in there.
But even from a design standpoint,
application in session
classes aren't necessarily
supposed to be all that heavy.
You're using Objective-C in
a Java project.
And this is where I said,
I like Objective-C, I like Java.
I'm not going to get into
the religion wars over that.
But if you've chosen Java,
and I see Objective-C anywhere
in your project,
I know you've drawn one
of those blue lines.
Similarly, the next two actually
are not all that bad.
I mean, you're working with the
EO Access framework.
There's lots of benign reasons
to be down at that level,
probably more than anything else here.
But still, at that point,
you're down below the object level,
and all I really want to do is
make sure you justify your use.
The last one is a new one.
I only really found out about
this in the last two months or so.
I think it may be the result of
frustrated Objective-C programmers.
This is an option they have
to do some very strange things
while sticking with Java.
When you have custom key-val code,
that means that you're doing
things with the bindings or you're
doing things with the value for
key on your enterprise objects.
It's a relatively benign solution.
The other instance of this is if
you're changing your enterprise
objects so that they can tell,
based on a key value,
whether or not you're asking for a,
you know,
Let's say address from this particular
page or that particular page.
You know, if you just say put an
asterisk on the end of the key,
and you've got something
that can parse that out.
That's relatively benign.
Mostly it's a convenience.
It keeps you from having to put methods
inside each of those components to go and
get the value from the enterprise object
and manipulate it as that page wants it.
I'm against it,
but I'm not going to push it real hard.
The thing is that this opens up.
It actually does,
and I kind of hate to say
this because I'm telling you,
don't build the bomb this way.
You can put anything in bindings,
and if you're overriding
the take value for binding,
you can do anything with it.
You can very easily just put a binding
in and it says as long as the binding
starts with three exclamation points,
that means that the value that
comes in is a block of Perl code,
and I want you to send that out to the
Perl interpreter and take that value.
And that actually I've seen once,
not with Pearl, but with something else.
And that's exactly what I mean by,
you know, "Oh my God."
That sort of thing is
really hard to document,
too, because WAD files are not
where you're looking for code.
And for, as we move more and more into,
The broad developer community.
More people are going to be looking
at this stuff in WebObjects Builder.
And it's really hard to tell just as
you're zipping down through the bindings.
You know,
this has an asterisk on the end.
That means if it's a number coming in,
we're going to divide it
by two before we use it.
So, you know,
I don't like that a lot.
I think that there's a real possibility
for abuse right now on that.
So let's assume you've managed to get
through design without any major efforts.
You're on to prototyping.
You've got to divide the
prototyping into two things.
This is a customer issue.
The user interface prototyping.
Now, if you remember,
way back at the beginning,
I told you what a spec is.
And user interface prototyping
is writing the spec.
And you have to have
the customer know that.
Make them understand that until
you've locked down like 90% of
the user interface to a level of
detail that you've got screenshots,
they haven't yet specified the app.
And all the work that you're doing
up to that point may not be final.
Technical thing.
That's where you're trying to decide
whether or not you can actually hit
that airline reservation system,
whether you can integrate the credit
card processing with the Oracle database,
that sort of thing.
And you want to make the interface
for that as ugly as you can.
You don't want to confuse the
customer into thinking there's
any possibility that the code
you're writing now is anything but
demonstrating that you can go do it.
I like to say,
when you're doing the demos,
you want to demo the user interface on a
Mac and demo the technical stuff on a PC.
And if you do that, this throw-it-away
thing works on its own.
When to construction.
Here I'm mostly talking to the developer.
Assume the project's going to
continue after you're gone.
This is a long project.
It's got to be at least six months.
And you've got to be responsible.
and I have some things to say
about responsibility in a bit.
Overall though,
the construction of a WebObjects
application is no different
than the rest of development.
There's not much I can say about
WebObjects technology-specific
things as you're writing the code.
Two things, though,
that are really helpful,
and unfortunately I don't
see enough of standardized.
This idea of standardizing
keywords in your comments,
and I'll have an example on this.
It's really helpful to come up with
a list of keywords that someone
can search through the code for,
and that list of keywords ought
to be put in your repository.
You can hear that again.
Document, document, document.
Okay?
How about that?
Anybody seen that kind of comment before?
Interesting thing about that.
The first, the first instance,
that's actually two comments.
I mean, separated by an
indefinite amount of time.
And the first, the first comment there
I sort of made up,
although I've got,
I've seen something close to it.
The frightening thing,
the second comment I lifted verbatim
from an app that's in production.
All I did was change the three
initials there at the end to my own,
which may not have been all that
necessary because when I asked around,
nobody could tell me who that was.
That's what I want to see.
And you don't have to
add every line like that.
But when you're doing something like,
you know, clearly like that,
that first thing there,
it's a line of nothing but keywords.
It's great to have, you know,
fix me is a really common one.
I think we all use that occasionally.
But if you standardize and say, yes,
indeed, this is what we're going to
use when we've got something
that needs to be looked at.
If you can put keywords for the
dependencies of every version of
things that you need to work with,
that's really helpful.
You notice you've got enough
text there that no one's
likely to go around and put a,
hmm, line after it.
And I put my full name and a date.
So at least, you know,
people may not remember who
I am even with a full name.
But there's a date there so they have
some clue as to when it was an issue.
And the other nice thing
actually about doing the whole,
the keywords for versions of stuff,
this is a 3-5 problem in theory.
In practice,
I've completely made this up.
What you need to do is
every time you upgrade to 4,
somebody searches through
for all the 3-5 keywords,
verifies whether or not
these comments are right.
And changes the 3-5 to 4,
which means you've never got any
issues that are more than one
version old of any of your products.
And you'll really like that.
Trust me.
More construction things.
At this point, the developers stopped
wanting to go to meetings.
Really, the meetings have a purpose.
It's up to your management
from a development standpoint,
it's up to whoever it is you interface
to the rest of the team to make
sure that you're not going to the
meetings you don't need to go to.
And one of the things that
I hear every once in a while,
and people try to convince
me this is a bad thing,
12 of us trooped into a room,
five minutes later we walked out again.
What a waste of time.
No, that's perfect.
If it took you an hour, that's bad.
But to walk into a room,
walk out in five minutes,
that means the system's working.
It means everybody showed up
like they were supposed to.
There's no open questions from
people who didn't show up,
and everything's on track.
If you were to take a look at it,
you'd find you'd take more time trying to
coordinate among those 12 people whether
or not they needed to have a meeting
than to just have them all show up.
And this last item, clever is bad.
You know, I tried to--I thought about
making this less bold.
And I talked to other people in
my team about this concept and,
you know, I thought that, you know,
maybe it's just me.
And after talking to them,
I decided it deserves its own slide.
Okay?
Clever is bad.
And keep in mind,
this is clever in terms of coding.
This is not intelligent design.
This is clever coding.
And I have an example for you.
I think probably the
cleverest I've ever been,
which is to say the grossest
violation of this principle.
Go back to 1992, I think it was.
I was doing what was--what's
now Cocoa Development.
And I really wanted a print
panel to work differently.
So, I went into the debugger,
I disassembled the appropriate
part of the print panel code,
I examined that and figured
out the memory locations of the
private instance variables of it,
and then with a little pointer
arithmetic and a little guessing,
I managed to get it so when I wanted to,
I could stuff data into those places
in memory that the print panel would
go look to see what its state was,
and I could change it.
And it worked.
Uh, you know...
This was code that I, in theory, owned.
I was going to maintain.
Nobody was paying me to do this.
It was mine.
This wasn't something I was leaving
behind for somebody at my expense.
Although, I'm standing here,
and I've got an Apple badge
on when I have a badge,
which means I'm not maintaining it.
I think I know who originally
did have to maintain that,
and I liked him.
Even though there's maybe 20 lines
of code and I had a page and a half
of documentation on that whole thing,
when I look back on it,
I was much prouder of that
achievement then than I am now.
And although it's hard for you to think
forward and imagine how am I going
to feel about that 10 years from now,
it's a pretty good guideline.
How would you feel if a
friend had to maintain this?
Now, the three items there, I mean,
why is it bad?
Outside of, you know, my story.
Basically,
I had an even bolder version of this
slide and I decided to tone it down
because probably without my words
it would seem a little too harsh.
But first you can fool yourself.
And by that I mean a couple of things.
But you can have a problem with,
you may not actually understand
everything you're doing.
You know, I think the print panel worked.
It worked in all the cases I tested.
But, I mean,
kind of wandering through the
assembly code is not necessarily
the best way to be sure.
If I had to go back to that now, I mean,
admittedly that's eight years ago.
But, I mean, if I had to go back to
maybe even six months later,
I may not know any idea
what it was I was doing.
And that kind of follows on.
You can fool your team
two different ways.
You can fool them in coming up
with something that's so clever
they have no idea how to use it.
or you can fool them because
six months later you're gone.
You're the new CTO at showmethemoney.com.
They have to try to maintain it.
And last, this is something that
people don't think of.
You can fool us, and by this I mean the
engineering team at Apple,
because everybody knows there's no
guarantee if you use private API.
And of course, the print panel thing,
I knew there was no guarantee.
But what you don't really get is
that there's not really a guarantee
if you use public API in a way
that nobody ever thought you could.
If you're depending upon
the order in which certain
things happen to get called,
so you can stuff things into a request
here and pick up the fact that those
values are in the response over there,
you run a risk.
The scariest thing that you can hear
from a project management standpoint when
someone's showing off something cool is,
"Ooh, I bet Apple didn't know
you could do that."
Okay, so you got the app built, maybe.
Testing.
You need to have a real
separate environment for this.
You need to get your customers
to duplicate the production
as much as you possibly can.
Testing web apps is a boring thing to do.
Use automated tools for both the
regression testing and for load testing.
Although it's occasionally,
it's kind of neat to just get the whole,
you know,
accounting department to go at 4:00,
come and hit the app.
You've got to give them
a break in their day.
You use the humans for
functional testing,
but the other thing you want to do is
you want to have the occasional human
stopping in doing your load testing
because you're going to gather stats both
from the inside of the app in terms of,
you know,
the woe stats things and from the
outside in terms of what the overall,
you know, what a browser would see
in terms of response time.
What you don't get is the human,
"I thought this page would go quicker."
So, while you're doing the load testing,
just have a human sitting by
doing some stuff and letting
them know how they feel about it.
And we're back to meetings.
Schedule the regular bug tracking
meetings and make people show up.
Because, once again,
the developers are very busy trying
to do things other than fix bugs
that someone mentioned a week ago.
So, make sure that...
The right people attend
each of those meetings,
not everybody,
but that you have them to really,
by the time you're down
to the testing phase,
it's got to be daily.
Performance.
Now it works.
How fast can it go?
I'm cheating here.
There were like three different
sessions you should have gone to if
you wanted to know about performance.
These are the questions
everybody asks though.
And the real point of this actually is
not so much what there is to say here,
it's where I'm saying it.
If you haven't gotten to this far,
you can't answer those questions.
And too often,
I run into a case when I'm doing proposal
type things that someone's going to say,
"Well, I realize I haven't told
you what the app does yet,
but how many boxes do I need?"
You can't do it.
I mean, I have tried to come up with
heuristics for this sort of thing,
to just say, well, if you happen to have,
you know, a gigahertz Pentium machine
running as your app server,
then assume that you can support,
you know,
four transactions a second as long
as no response is longer than X.
Doesn't work.
You really do need that because you're
either CPU-bound or you're going
to be memory-bound on these things,
and you don't know which until you know
how much memory you're going to have.
So, never answer these questions until
after you've started testing.
That given, assuming it's slow,
what do you want to do about it?
First bullet item there,
I guess some people are going to say,
"Well, that's obvious."
But it isn't, because it's not just
what's most commonly slow.
It's what's really slow that
kills you from a user perspective.
Let's say you have a whole bunch of
pages that come back in two seconds
and one page that comes back in ten.
Now if that thing shows up
ten percent of the time,
you can do the math and you end up with
a number that's three seconds or so
for your response time within the app.
That's not what the user sees at all.
And for that I'm going to go back
to the whole grocery store thing,
which is you've got your fifteen
items or less and you're standing
behind somebody with a hundred items.
And behind you is a bunch
of people who also have two,
three items.
Now from the checkout
clerk's perspective,
one person took a lot of time,
other people just zipped right through.
You're back there fuming.
So the approach that grocery stores
take is they have 15 items or less.
And I actually kind of advocate
the other side of this,
which is you should have lines for
people with lots and lots of things
and make them stand behind each other.
And it sounds like a joke,
but it actually, it goes back to this,
as well.
I mean, as app design,
it's a good thing sometimes to
recognize when an operation is
going to be expensive and shunt
it off to the app server just
handling the expensive operations.
And this is where the
human factor comes in,
is people usually recognize that,
you know,
this is going to take a long time.
I want to find every hotel in Orlando.
That's great.
However, for the people who think they're
doing something that's really short
and they end up behind somebody who's
looking for every hotel in Orlando,
they're upset.
So 90% of the time,
when you're looking to
improve the performance,
it's data access.
So you may look at
modifying the data model.
Or you may look at customizing versions
of the data model for each of your apps.
Because the ReadWrite app may have
a different need than the ReadOnly.
And a lot of people don't
think in terms of that because
you've got your data framework.
Well, you don't have to have
just one data framework.
You can have them optimized for the
uses that they're going to have.
So think about that.
And lastly,
manually fetching the data you need
is something that we almost always
resort to in one case or another.
And when I say manually,
it's not all that manual.
What we're really saying here is rather
than configure a WoW display group
with a data source to go and get data,
go ahead and create a
fetch spec yourself.
Fetch objects with it and pass the
array over to the display group.
And what that can do is you can
then set things like the prefetching
at a much finer granularity for
what's being used at the time.
A little bit more on that data access.
This is something I see
a little bit too much of.
Don't have complicated bindings
that just keep dotting along.
Because in the middle there,
you're not really sure,
from a coding perspective,
how you get from manager
to spouse up to car.
That isn't even necessarily
all in one data source.
To find out what the spouse's car is,
you may have to go up to
some mainframe system.
It's much better in
this case to go ahead,
figure out the
relationships that you need,
fetch the data for that,
and just let  you know,
if you put that thing
inside a repetition,
you'd be here forever.
So,
Anticipate the needs of your interface
elements and try to provide them
with their data ahead of time so that
they don't have to do it themselves.
They're not smart about
data access that way.
And the last thing here,
you'd think you'd never have this,
but you do,
is that customers will ask for,
"I'd like the whole database, please."
And sure, they understand that
the fetch takes forever,
and it's making the app go slow,
but they don't realize that
they're then transferring like 10
megabytes of data to their browser.
And they wonder why
their network is slow.
Why is my email not getting it every
time someone tries to run the app?
So,
Limit this stuff.
I mean, at the very least,
go ahead and put it in a display
group's turn on the batching.
And if nothing else,
that's going to show them when they see
they've got a zillion pages of batches,
what a silly idea it is to try
to fetch all this data at once.
Okay, you've gotten to deploying.
You need a deployment team.
Same thing.
Not necessarily a whole big team.
Could be a small team.
Could be a guy.
Cool thing about this is if you go back
to what I was saying about the builds,
about the releases, about the testing,
you've got an environment that's
just like it that you're going to go
to production on and your deployment
team gets to practice every single
time you put out a test build.
So they really know what
they're doing by that time.
There shouldn't be any last minute,
"Do we know Solaris?" kind of questions.
And gather as many stats as you can while
you actually got this thing running.
But you don't want to impact performance.
I don't want to see a bunch of
things logged out to the screen
to let you know what's going on.
I'm mostly here talking about, you know,
you obviously get the woe statistics.
But also,
what you want to do is check the
CPU loads on all the machines,
web server, app server, data servers,
etc.
Check the memory on all these things.
I mean, it doesn't cost that much.
Just go ahead and check these--checkpoint
these things once an hour forever.
Because if you ever need
to know what happened,
you've got knowledge.
And, you know, knowledge is power.
Last thing there, the application is not
finished when you deploy.
That's a function of the kind of
customers we're talking about here and
the kind of apps we're talking about.
You can expect a feature is going
to not make it into version one.
The only way it's not going
to be later than it is anyway.
Therefore, there's always a version 1.1.
And from a management perspective,
that means you need to be
thinking about who your
maintenance team is ahead of time.
And you need to figure out
not just your developers.
Your maintenance team needs some
of the same overhead as the rest.
Some of this stuff can be shared.
Some of it can't.
This is a sad thing for
the management types.
Probably a good thing for
the development types.
I didn't put this on the slide here.
The biggest issue that I run
into with deploying a big app
"Attrition.
This is the point when everyone leaves.
And really when you're using
something like WebObjects,
you've got smart people and
a high-demand technology.
At any moment, you have to be prepared to
have somebody walk in and say,
'I'm gone in two weeks.' When you deploy,
there's a real good chance
you're going to lose like 40%
of your folks in the next month,
because there's a lot of people
who want to see that make it.
And then that's when they'll move on.
And if you're not prepared for that,
it's devastating.
Hey, what went wrong?
This is actually not even my slide,
essentially.
This is a known thing
within software development.
If you never manage
to get it done at all,
it's management's fault.
No doubt about it.
No matter how bad your
engineering might be,
it's management's fault.
They planned poorly.
They didn't follow their plan.
They picked the wrong people.
They used Windows, whatever.
And the second half of that really
is if you're stuck at version one,
then your engineers did a lousy job.
What's unsaid here,
but I think we all understand,
is that when they're not within earshot,
it's the customer's fault.
Really.
But I'd like to switch that around,
because despite all the
things that are in the way,
actually,
Most of these apps actually do field,
and they're successful.
So let's think, what went right?
Who gets the credit?
And I got to say, I don't care how good
your engineering is.
If you actually deploy version one,
management gets the credit.
And when I say that,
I don't mean that deploying version
one means you got all the features in,
or even that you got it all in on time.
It means that
Things went wrong and the customer
didn't fire you and the team
didn't quit and you got there.
The second thing there is, you know,
credit the engineering when the
customer comes back and says,
"I know I only wanted
one language before.
Now it needs four languages.
I know I was going to use this
service to validate credit cards,
and it will have a response time of
maybe five seconds with 100% reliability,
but I can get a lot cheaper
thing from somebody who will
respond in two seconds with 75%
reliability." And that's actually
an example from my own experience.
If you get that far, great.
At that point, you want to congratulate
the engineering folks.
You don't want to
congratulate them too early,
though.
That's when they leave.
And to be honest, to be fair,
I want to be fair,
also not on this bullet
item is if it works,
particularly if they
happen to be an earshot,
credit the customer.
Never hurts, and it's actually true.
A lot of times when I talk to engineering
teams about their experiences,
you know, how's it going, I hear,
"My customer doesn't
understand the problem.
My customer can't make a
decision." And the ever popular,
"My customer is stupid."
And see, it's not true.
The customer is not stupid.
The customer has different priorities
than you and doesn't necessarily have
all the information to make a decision.
So if I can apologize to folks who maybe
missed lunch and are thinking that the
candy is really a good idea right now,
I'd like to go back to the grocery
store just one more time as an analogy.
I mean, if you've got an analogy,
you've got a metaphor,
just pound it into the ground.
Follow your customers sometime to the
grocery store and think in terms of,
you know,
they're heading down the cereal aisle
and they stop by the Frosted Flakes.
And if you're going to have a, you know,
a metropolitan area,
chances are they've got choices there.
They're going to have the
Kellogg's Frosted Flakes,
you know, the national brand.
They're going to have at least, you know,
maybe a regional brand,
but certainly a store brand of it.
And, you know,
they may pick up the boxes,
they'll look at the
nutritional information,
something like that.
But, you know,
they'll put them down and then
they've got a choice to face.
You know, okay,
the national brand comes with QuickTime,
which is cool.
The local brand?
It's cheaper.
And what happens?
Sometime within like 10 seconds,
they pick up a box, put it in the basket,
they move on.
Nobody ever complains that the
local brand doesn't have QuickTime.
Nobody ever complains the
Frosted Flakes are too expensive
compared to the local brand.
So when you're doing
Those kinds of things with your customer,
when you're trying to tell them bad news,
schedule slippage, whatever,
what you need to do is very simple.
You lay out the options for them.
You give them the consequences
of each of the options they have.
You make it very clear,
"We can do this your way,
but there's a good chance if we lose
this guy over here six months from now,
we'll have to pull that feature
because we can't maintain it."
Give the customer that
kind of information,
the customer will make a decision.
Once they've made the decision,
document the decision.
Put it in your repository.
So, in summary, big projects are hard.
They are.
But that's all big projects.
That's not just WebObjects projects.
Basically,
if you've got anybody who's ever done
a hard project in any other technology,
they can manage a big
project in WebObjects.
And WebObjects helps because, you know,
we're always cutting steps.
So what is a hard project now and
is a big project and requires a big
team this year may not next year.
And last thing is, I mean,
it's not really everybody is
suited for the big projects.
I mean, some people just, uh...
They want to be too creative.
They don't like the structure.
And that's fine.
There's lots of places for that.
But, you know,
if you can stick it out in there,
it's--there's really an immense sense of
pride in having done something like that.
It's very much like
building the tall building.
And what you'll find is that no matter
how many little projects you might do,
it's always the big
projects that you remember.
And incidentally,
it's always the big projects
you put on your resume.
So, because we are so close
to the end of this,
there's like nothing else you can go to.
If you haven't learned by now,
all you've really got is the
feedback forum to complain
about the last 17 sessions.
Most of the For More information
you must have seen before,
and the WebObjects lab is closed,
so sorry about that.
You must have seen these names by now,
Tony and Ernest.
If you got any questions
about all this stuff,
even something that's
specifically for me,
go ahead and send it to Ernie.
Ernie will route it to me.
And now we're on to Q&A.